Before we can get started using Docker, we need to install some Docker tools.
Now the tools that you install are going to depend on your operating system,
so I'm going to talk through some different options here.
We'll talk through a legacy option and then a more modern option, and that way,
regardless of what operating system you're on,
you should build to get Docker going.
The first one that we're going to talk about is called Docker Toolbox.
This is a legacy option that at this point is really only for
Windows 7 or 8, or if you don't have Windows 10 Pro,
you just have Windows 10 Home, then you possibly might use it there as well.
Now this provides all the image and container tools though that you would need.
So while it's an older legacy option at this point and it's been
deprecated, it does provide the key tools that you need.
So if you are are on one of these operating systems,
then you could at least get it working.
The way it works is it uses a virtual machine
called VirtualBox to run a Linux VM,
and then the Docker commands that we're going to learn
about are going to execute against this Linux VM that's
going to be running in VirtualBox.
So what do you get with Docker Toolbox?
Well, the first thing you're going to get is the Docker client.
This is going to be really important so that you can communicate with
containers and images and all these different technologies in Docker
that we're going to be talking about.
You're also going to get a tool called Docker Machine, and this will
let you hook up to the virtual machine. Docker Compose we'll have a
whole module on later in the course,
but this provides an orchestration mechanism for bringing up many
containers, 1, 2, 10, or 50 if you wanted, on your machine. And then
another tool is called Docker Kitematic.
This is more of a GUI tool,
and it's not one we're going to spend a lot of time on in this course,
but I will do a quick demo and give you the basics of how it works.
And then finally,
I mentioned that this is all running in a virtual machine called VirtualBox.
And this is something that actually can stand on its own.
You don't have to have Docker for VirtualBox, but that's what
they use kind of out of the box to run this.
Now what if you're not on Windows 7 or 8 though? What would you run?
Well, in that case,
you're going to run Docker Desktop. So this is going to be
for Windows 10 Pro or higher or Mac.
So if you're on one of those, you'll definitely want to pick Docker Desktop.
It's much more modern, it's updated frequently,
and it's going to have all these tools at your disposal.
So this also provides image and container tools, but behind the scenes,
it actually uses Hyper‑V on Windows.
That's why you need Windows 10 Pro in this case.
Or if you're on Mac,
it uses HyperKit to run these Linux VMs. So that functionality right
there will be one of the deciding factors on which one you'll be able
to choose, Docker Toolbox or Docker Desktop.
If you're on Windows and don't have access to Hyper‑V,
then you're going to have to choose Docker Toolbox.
Whereas if you're on Windows 10 Pro or Mac,
then you're going to want to go with Docker Desktop.
So as mentioned, this works on Windows or Mac. Now on Linux,
you can run something called Docker Engine,
and it really depends on the flavor of Linux.
There's multiple options if you go to the docs that you can learn about.
But you can also run the Docker Engine there, but it's not the full Docker
Desktop like you'll have on Windows or on Mac.
So what do you get with Docker Desktop?
Well, you're going to get a Docker client again,
Docker Compose,
which is this orchestration mechanism for bringing up and
managing multiple containers, and then you also have access to
this GUI tool called Docker Kitematic.
Now it's not installed by default,
but it will run as long as you have Docker Desktop installed.
So to wrap up our discussion of the different tools,
let's do a quick comparison side by side.
So if you're on Windows 7 or 8,
you're going to have to choose Docker Toolbox. That will install VirtualBox, and
it's going to use a tool called Docker Machine to allow you to connect from your
command line into the running virtual machine.
If you're on Windows 10 Pro or higher or you're on Mac,
then you're going to be using Docker Desktop, and this is the modern version
of Docker. And this uses Hyper‑V if you're on Windows,
that's why you need the Pro version of Windows 10 or higher,
and it uses HyperKit on Mac. Now on Linux, although
you don't install Docker Desktop,
you can install Docker Engine and Docker Compose separately. So it's
possible to get these same types of tools but you're not going to have
some of the other functionality that I'll be showing you here that you
would have on Windows or Mac.
So that's a quick summary of the different tools that are available. Let's now switch our focus to Docker in action.